March 13, 2023

General theme for the day -- some baseball measures are more useful than others in understanding player ability.

1.  Let's talk about batting average.

Tom Tango (famous sabermetrician) hates the batting average as a measure of hitting performance.

There are at least three reasons why batting average is a poor measure of hitting.

Reason 1. (What does it omit?)

Reason 2. (Value of hits?)

Reason 3. (Use in prediction)

Any useful measure should be predictive.  That is, if you know the measure for one season, you can accurately predict the value of the measure for the next season.

Here's a Shiny app to help understand this point.

- we collect a specific measure for two consecutive seasons for a group of batters
- construct a scatterplot of the season measures
- generally see a positive association pattern
- strength of the association is measured by a correlation (falls between -1 and 1)
- larger correlation values (close to 1) correspond to measures reflecting batter abilities

Let's try it out for FanGraphs hitting stats for 2021 and 2022.

https://bayesball.shinyapps.io/FanGraphs_Batting_Measures/

I wrote a paper asking if a batting average is a good measure of the ability of a hitter. (You'll read this as part of your homework.)

2.  Main question:  what are suitable measures for pitchers?

- Which measures are used to determine the Cy Young awards each season?

- What are some traditional measures?  What's wrong with these measures?

- Read my blog post:  

https://baseballwithr.wordpress.com/2023/01/30/ability-and-luck-in-fangraphs-pitching-statistics/

- FanGraphs web site gives a large number of pitching measures of different types:

Dashboard
Standard
Advanced
Batted Ball
Win Probability
Pitch Value
Plate Discipline
Value
Pitch Info
+ Stats
Statcast

- Problem:  some measures are impacted by other (non-pitching variables) such as the team performance or defensive fielding performance, ballpark, etc.

- General question:  Which measures are best in assessing pitching ability?

I wrote a Shiny app where one constructs scatterplots of pitching measures for two consecutive seasons.

https://bayesball.shinyapps.io/FanGraphs_Pitching_Measures/





